**Notes ECG

****BIOMEDICAL DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING

3 types :
1. Standard clinical ECG (12 leads)
2. VCG (3 orthogonal leads)
3. Monitoring ECG (1 or 2 leads)

"The clinical bandwidth used for
recording the standard 12-lead ECG is 0.05–100 Hz. For monitoring applications,
such as for intensive care patients and for ambulatory patients, the bandwidth is re-
stricted to 0.5–50 Hz. In these environments, rhythm disturbances (i.e., arrhyth-
mias) are principally of interest rather than subtle morphological changes in the
waveforms."

"A third
bandwidth used for heart rate meters (cardiotachometers) maximizes the signal-to-
noise ratio for detecting the QRS complex. Such a filter passes the frequencies of
the QRS complex while rejecting noise including non-QRS waves in the signal
such as the P and T waves. This filter helps to detect the QRS complexes but dis-
torts the ECG so much that the appearance of the filtered signal is not clinically ac-
ceptable"

"Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Frequency range: dc–100 Hz (0.5–60 Hz)
Signal range: 15–100 mV

Electromyogram (EMG)
Frequency range: 10–200 Hz
Signal range: function of muscle activity and electrode placement

Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Frequency range: 0.05–100 Hz
Signal range: 10 μV(fetal), 5 mV(adult)

Heart rate
Frequency range: 45–200 beats/min

Blood pressure
Frequency range: dc–200 Hz (dc–60 Hz)
Signal range: 40–300 mm Hg (arterial); 0–15 mm Hg (venous)
Breathing rate
Frequency range: 12–40 breaths/min"

Sensor/Elec -> Amp -> Low-Pass filter -> analog multiplex -> sample and hold -> Analog
to digital converter

Une fois qu'on aura présenté les concepts on passe sur la chaine d'instru

"The objective of an A/D converter is to determine the output digital word for a
given analog input. As mentioned previously, A/D converters often make use of
D/A converters."

chap 5.1.2 
"In many biomedical signal processing applications, it is important to preserve
certain characteristics of a signal throughout the filtering operation, such as the
height and duration of the QRS pulse."

"FIR filters especially useful for adaptive filtering where filter
coefficients change as a function of the input data."


"A common biomedical signal processing problem involves the removal of noise of
a particular frequency or frequency range (such as 60 Hz)"

chap 6.
"In this chapter we introduce the analysis and design of infinite impulse response
(IIR) digital filters that have the potential of sharp rolloffs (Tompkins and Webster,
1981)."

Exemple de l'intégrateur 
"Since they use feedback, they may be unstable if improperly
designed. Also, they typically do not have linear phase response."

Chap 7.
When digital filters must operate in a real-time environment, many filter designs
become unsatisfactory due to the amount of required computation time. A consid-
erable reduction in computation time is achieved by replacing floating-point coeffi-
cients with small integer coefficients in filter equations.

Chap.8
"This chapter discusses how to build adaptive digital filters to perform noise cancel-
lation and signal extraction. Adaptive techniques are advantageous because they do
not require a priori knowledge of the signal or noise characteristics as do fixed fil-
ters. Adaptive filters employ a method of learning through an estimated synthesis
of a desired signal and error feedback to modify the filter parameters."

"An adaptive filter learns the statistics of the input sources
and tracks them if they vary slowly."

"Prenatal monitoring has made it possible to detect the heartbeat of the unborn child
noninvasively. However, motion artifact and the maternal ECG make it very
difficult to perceive the fetal ECG since it is a low-amplitude signal."


Chap.9
Signal averaging is a digital technique for separating a repetitive signal from noise without introducing signal distortion (Tompkins and
Webster, 1981)

"One predominant application area of signal averaging is in electroencephalogra-
phy. The EEG recorded from scalp electrodes is difficult to interpret in part be-
cause it consists of a summation of the activity of the billions of brain cells. It is
impossible to deduce much about the activity of the visual or auditory parts of the
brain from the EEG."

"1. The signal waveform must be repetitive (although it does not have to be peri-
odic). This means that the signal must occur more than once but not necessarily
at regular intervals.
2. The noise must be random and uncorrelated with the signal. In this application,
random means that the noise is not periodic and that it can only be described
statistically (e.g., by its mean and variance).
3. The temporal position of each signal waveform must be accurately known."

An important assumption made in signal averaging theory is that the noise is
Gaussian. This assumption is not usually completely valid for biomedical signals.
Also, if the noise distribution is related to the signal, misleading results can occur.


Chap 10.
For example, an ECG used in
monitoring may have a bandwidth of 50 Hz and be sampled at 200 sps in order to
easily visualize the higher-frequency attributes of the QRS complex. Sampling the-
ory tells us that we can sample such a signal at 100 sps. TP provides a way to re-
duce the effective sampling rate by half to 100 sps by selectively saving important
signal points (i.e., the peaks and valleys or turning points).

chap 11.
A biomedical signal is often corrupted by noise (e.g., powerline interference, mus-
cle or motion artifacts, RF interference from electrosurgery or diathermy appara-
tus). Therefore, it is useful to know the frequency spectrum of the corrupting signal
in order to be able to design a filter to eliminate it. If we want to find out, for ex-
ample, how well the patient’s cardiac output is correlated with the area of the QRS
complex, then we need to use proper correlation techniques.
